Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English Learning for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to fascinating stories, and learn weird and
wonderful things about the world at the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and this is a special episode.
Yes, it is episode number 500, so to mark the occasion we are going
to deviate from our usual style of weird and wonderful stories.
Instead, I am going to talk to you about this milestone, what
it means for me, for the business, and where we go from here.
Ok then, let’s get right into it, shall we?
If you look through lists of things that you should and shouldn’t do after having
a baby, especially your first child, most of it probably won’t surprise you.
You’d probably find recommendations about spending some quality time
with your partner before the baby comes, whether that’s going out
for coffee or dinner or just having a calm walk in a park together.
Maybe someone would advise you to get some of those black-out
blinds so that your baby can sleep more easily during the day.
Someone else might suggest not organising anything for the first few weeks, as you’ll be
tired, you never know what might happen, you know, it’s best just to play things by ear.
One recommendation some people might give you is to not start anything
new, as you will already have enough changes going on in your life.
And especially not starting something that requires peace and quiet, and no background noise.
Most people probably have the good sense to realise this, but five years ago, I didn’t.
Just a few weeks before my first son was born, I wrote and recorded
the first episode of this podcast: English Learning for Curious Minds.
Fast forward to today, almost five years later, and this is episode number 500.
As we are now halfway to a thousand, I wanted to mark this milestone by sharing a little bit
about the behind-the-scenes of the podcast, about our listeners, and how the sausage is made.
But the first thing I want to say is thank you.
Whether you've been listening since episode one, the very first episode,
or whether you have only just started listening, you’re amazing.
And if you've listened to every single episode, all 500, and especially if you are not my
parents, thank you very much, you've spent more than 150 hours listening to me blabbering on.
I hope you’ve enjoyed it, and that you will continue
to enjoy it as we get to episode 1,000 and beyond.
Now, thank yous out of the way, let me start by telling you a bit about how the
sausage gets made, how we go from a kernel of an idea through to the finished product.
Well, we have quite an extensive research process.
For a while, I used to work with a small team of
researchers, but in fact I now do almost all of this myself.
It normally involves reading books, academic papers,
documentaries, articles online, and a fair bit of Wikipedia.
There is then the writing of the script, the reviewing,
the redrafting, reviewing again, and hopefully, that’s it.
It is a lot of fun to do, but it’s tough because the more I learn about any
kind of topic, the harder it is to condense it into a 20-minute episode.
There are always, and I mean always, large bits of really interesting
information that I need to cut out in order to make sure it doesn’t get too long.
This leads to tonnes of emails from people saying “You should have mentioned x or y”, but
hey, the objective with every episode is to tell the most interesting and relevant bits of
the story and if people feel inspired to go and research it themselves, then that’s great.
They will no doubt find other interesting elements that didn’t make it into the final script.
A few people have asked me how much I use tools like ChatGPT in the research and
writing process, and the answer is that I don’t really use it at all during the
writing process because I find the output to sound quite unlike my style, but it
is pretty useful when it comes to reviewing and suggesting areas for improvement.
Then, when the script is ready, there’s the recording of the episode.
On one level, this is the easy bit because it involves reading out a
pre-written script, but it might surprise you that even after 500 episodes I
still make loads of mistakes and often have to re-record large parts of it.
Then there’s the audio editing, cleaning the sound, removing
any background noise, and fixing any errors or re-takes.
At the beginning I did all of this by myself, I think I did the first 100
episodes or so, but my wonderful editor, Ezequiel, has been doing this ever since.
So if you think that the audio sounds good, which I
certainly do, well it is he that you need to thank.
When that’s all done I go through the finished audio, I select all of the
more advanced words and expressions that will be defined in our study packs.
There are normally around 100 of these more advanced words, which we create custom definitions for.
After that the transcript is passed over to our in-house teacher, Fokion, who
meticulously prepares each of the study packs, creates custom definitions for each word
or expression, makes the quizzes and turns them into top-quality learning materials.
And then there's the finding the right image, writing descriptions, publishing
it on our website, creating a version for YouTube, and all of that sort of stuff.
Each episode is around 20 minutes long, but behind the scenes, all in all, it
takes something like 20 or 30 hours to go from an idea for an episode through
to the final, published audio version, complete with all the learning materials.
Sometimes it is quicker, if it’s a subject I know a lot about already,
sometimes it’s a lot longer if it requires a much more extensive
research process, like the bumper one we just did on Haiti, for example.
Now, what else can I tell you about “behind the scenes”?
Well, you listen to this show, but how about I tell you about
where some of your other fellow curious minds come from?
Podcasts are funny because you put one out into the world and if you don’t have
a large budget to promote it like I didn’t, you just sort of hope that people
will find it, recommend it to their friends, and continue listening to it.
And this has happened beyond my wildest dreams and expectations.
We have listeners from all over the world, and by the time you listen to
this, the show will probably have been downloaded more than 8 million times.
It sounds like a lot, maybe it is a lot, but it still seems small when you think about
how many people around the world are learning English, either officially or unofficially.
We definitely have a lot more room to grow, and perhaps when
we get to episode number 1,000 that number will be 80 million.
Who knows.
In terms of where most of your other, fellow listeners are, it really is split all over the world.
Europe is responsible for around 45% of our listeners, another 33% are in Asia, there
are around 10% in both North and South America, 3% in Africa and 1.5% in Australia.
Breaking it down even further, for reasons I have never been completely sure of, Spain has
always been the most popular country for this podcast, making up around 14% of all listeners.
It’s followed by Germany, Turkey, Brazil, Iran and Italy,
which all account for between 4 and 5% of listeners.
Now, as you may know, this little business started with this
podcast, but we’ve since expanded to do quite a lot of other stuff.
We made a business English course, we’ve done a live Academy, our new story-based courses
have been particularly popular, and we also have our membership, which gives people access
to stuff like our interactive transcripts, instant translations, study packs, and even live
challenges, like the one that’s going on as I’m making this episode,  on the theme of Roald Dahl.
There is a lot going on, but the core and the heart of the business, where
everything emanates from, is this podcast, English Learning for Curious Minds.
Fortunately, the podcast is made possible by thousands of paying
members from over 100 countries now, which is a wonderful thing.
It means we don’t have to rely on adding annoying adverts for Coca-Cola or dishwasher tablets
or Hyundai cars, and the few times that we have accepted sponsors, these have been for products
that I truly believe align with our mission of helping people like you improve their English.
Without the thousands of members who support our work, this podcast wouldn’t
be possible, so if you are a member, thank you from the bottom of my heart.
As you may know, if you've been following this podcast’s journey from the start, we've
been making two episodes a week of English Learning for Curious Minds: a bonus one
on a Tuesday that you need to be a member to listen to, and one on a Friday that’s
made available for free to listen on all podcast apps, and now also on YouTube.
This has been the case almost from the start, so a total of 500 episodes.
But, going forward, we are going to make a change to our production schedule.
Instead of releasing two new episodes a week, the member-only bonus one on
Tuesday and the free one on a Friday, we are going to release one per week.
Members will, of course, continue to get all episodes, but if you are listening on the
free feed, you’ll get new episodes once every two weeks instead of once every week.
The old episodes are going nowhere, you can still continue
to catch up on those if you haven’t listened to them already.
But from now on we’ll publish a new one on the free feed every two weeks instead of every week.
Now, why are we doing this, you might be wondering?
Well, there are two main reasons, that come from different directions.
Firstly, thousands of English learners have joined
as members and started to learn with our resources.
It’s been just fantastic to see, but there is a recurring theme.
We now make so much, and we have so many episodes for people
to choose from, that many people don’t know where to start.
I get questions all the time from new members asking about how to
choose episodes, how to use our study packs and vocabulary lists,
essentially how to use everything we provide to learn most efficiently.
And I get it, there are now 500 episodes, that’s more than 150 hours worth of
listening, and study packs containing something like 20,000 unique words and phrases,
pieces of advanced vocabulary, thousands of comprehension questions and so on.
It is a huge amount to process, and I’ve heard from lots of people that they feel like
they can never catch up, we make new episodes faster than they can listen to them.
For a new member, it would take almost a week of listening
non-stop, 24 hours a day, to catch up on everything we’ve made.
And that’s before you take into account the two new episodes every week.
It would be an insane amount of listening to do, and I’m
not surprised that it can be confusing and overwhelming.
And there is another reason that comes from a different direction.
To put it bluntly, keeping up with making two episodes per week in addition to
everything else we are doing is really hard work for our small team, and gives us
almost no time to develop the new learning-focused content that people want and need.
Ultimately, what you want to do is to improve your English, and it is my job, my duty even to
our members, to make sure that my team and I are helping you do that as effectively as possible.
So, making slightly fewer episodes will give us a bit more breathing
room and mean that we can continue to make the membership better and
better, which is exciting for me, and hopefully exciting for you.
Now, I understand that if you’ve been listening loyally for 5 years, and
patiently looking forward to every new episode, this news might be disappointing.
We are making slightly fewer episodes, there’s no getting around that.
But I hope that this explains the rationale behind why we are making this decision.
Our mission of building the most interesting place to improve your English hasn’t
changed, and my hope is that this next stage will allow us to make this podcast
better and better, and help you improve your English in a more interesting way.
Thank you for being part of this journey, and I really hope you’ll stick around for the next stage.
OK then, that is it for this unusual episode, a celebration of a
milestone that’s just a number, but an important one nevertheless.
As always, I’d love to hear from you.
How long have you been listening to this show?
Do you remember what the first episode you listened to was?
What can we do to make it better for you?
You can head right into our community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe and I'll catch you in the next episode.